Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
nociception and the physiology of pain. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Define pain and describe the nociceptors.
Pain is best defined, following the International Association for the Study of
Pain, as an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with,
or resembling that associated with,
actual or potential tissue damage — a definition emphasising that pain is both a
sensory and an emotional experience, and is not simply the detection of injury.
The detection of potentially damaging, noxious stimuli is nociception,
the first step, carried out by the nociceptors.
The nociceptors are the peripheral sensory receptors that respond to noxious
stimuli; they are the free, unencapsulated nerve endings of certain sensory
neurons, found in the skin, muscles, joints and viscera.
They respond to stimuli that threaten or cause tissue damage,
and are classified by the stimuli they detect: mechanical, thermal, and chemical,
with many being polymodal, responding to more than one.
They have a high threshold, responding only to noxious, not innocuous, stimuli.
They can be sensitised by tissue injury and inflammation, becoming more responsive.
So pain is an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with actual or
potential tissue damage — more than the mere detection of injury;
while nociception, its first step, is the detection of noxious stimuli by the
nociceptors, the high-threshold free nerve endings responding to mechanical,
thermal and chemical noxious stimuli, often polymodally,
and sensitised by injury — the distinction between nociception and the experience
of pain being fundamental.
Describe the primary afferent fibres that carry nociceptive information.
The nociceptive information from the nociceptors is carried to the spinal cord by
particular primary afferent fibres,
and the two main types account for the two components of pain — the fast,
sharp first pain and the slow, dull second pain — a distinction worth knowing.
The nociceptive afferents are the smaller, more slowly conducting fibres,
in contrast to the large fibres carrying touch and proprioception.
There are two main types.
The A-delta fibres are thinly myelinated, of medium diameter,
and conduct relatively rapidly; they carry information from mechanical and thermal
nociceptors, and mediate the fast, sharp,
well-localised first pain felt immediately on injury.
The C fibres are unmyelinated, of small diameter, and conduct slowly;
they are mostly polymodal nociceptors, and mediate the slow, dull, burning,
poorly-localised second pain that follows, and the aching pain of ongoing injury.
Their cell bodies lie in the dorsal root ganglia,
and they enter the dorsal horn of the spinal cord.
So nociceptive information is carried by the A-delta fibres — thinly myelinated,
faster-conducting, mediating the fast, sharp,
localised first pain — and the C fibres — unmyelinated, slow-conducting, polymodal,
mediating the slow, dull, poorly-localised second pain;
the two types accounting for the double nature of pain,
their cell bodies in the dorsal root ganglia, entering the dorsal horn.
Describe the dorsal horn and the ascending pain pathway.
The nociceptive afferents transmit their information to the central nervous system
through the dorsal horn of the spinal cord and the ascending pathways to the brain,
the understanding of which is the basis of the pain pathway and of the sites of
analgesic action.
The primary afferent fibres enter the dorsal horn of the spinal cord,
where they terminate in particular layers, or laminae, and synapse,
releasing transmitters — chiefly glutamate,
and neuropeptides such as substance P — onto the second-order neurons.
The dorsal horn is not a simple relay but a site of considerable processing and
modulation, where the incoming signals are integrated and gated.
The second-order neurons then cross to the opposite side of the cord and ascend,
chiefly in the spinothalamic tract, to the brain.
They project to the thalamus, and thence to the cortex,
where the sensory-discriminative aspects of pain — its location,
intensity and quality — are appreciated; and to other regions,
including the limbic system, mediating the emotional and affective aspects,
and to the brainstem.
So nociceptive information passes through the dorsal horn — a site of synaptic
transmission, by glutamate and substance P,
and of processing and modulation — to the second-order neurons,
which cross and ascend in the spinothalamic tract to the thalamus and thence to the
cortex, for the sensory-discriminative aspects, and to the limbic system,
for the emotional aspects; the pathway whose stations are the sites of analgesic
action.
Describe the gate control theory of pain.
The gate control theory, proposed by Melzack and Wall,
was a landmark in the understanding of pain,
because it explained how non-painful stimuli and descending influences can modulate
the transmission of pain at the spinal cord, and it remains a useful framework,
underlying some treatments.
The theory proposes that the transmission of nociceptive information through the
dorsal horn is not fixed, but is regulated by a gate — a gating mechanism — that
can be opened or closed to increase or decrease the onward transmission of pain.
The gate is influenced by the balance of activity in different afferent fibres.
Activity in the large, non-nociceptive fibres — those carrying touch and pressure —
tends to close the gate, inhibiting the transmission of pain,
through inhibitory interneurons in the dorsal horn;
this is why rubbing an injured area, or applying counter-stimulation,
relieves pain, and is the basis of transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation.
Activity in the small nociceptive fibres tends to open the gate.
The gate is also controlled by descending influences from the brain.
So the gate control theory holds that the transmission of pain through the dorsal
horn is regulated by a gate, closed by activity in the large touch fibres —
explaining the relief of pain by rubbing and by nerve stimulation — and opened by
the small nociceptive fibres, and controlled also by descending influences;
a landmark theory explaining the modulation of pain at the spinal cord and
underlying some of its treatment.
Describe the descending modulation of pain.
The brain exerts a powerful control over the transmission of pain through
descending pathways that modulate the dorsal horn,
and this descending modulation is important,
both physiologically and as the mechanism of action of the opioids and other
analgesics.
The brain contains a descending pain-modulating system,
originating in regions including the periaqueductal grey matter of the midbrain and
the rostral ventromedial medulla, which projects down the spinal cord to the dorsal
horn, where it inhibits — or, in some circumstances,
facilitates — the transmission of nociceptive information.
The inhibitory descending pathways act, in the dorsal horn,
through several transmitter systems: the release of endogenous opioid peptides,
acting on opioid receptors; and the release of noradrenaline and serotonin from
descending monoaminergic fibres, which inhibit transmission.
This system can be activated by stress, by attention and emotion,
and by the higher centres, accounting for the variability of pain and for phenomena
such as stress-induced analgesia.
Crucially, it is the system on which the analgesics act:
the opioids activate this descending inhibition and act directly in the dorsal
horn, and drugs that increase noradrenaline and serotonin in the cord are analgesic.
So the brain modulates pain through descending pathways,
from the periaqueductal grey and the medulla to the dorsal horn,
inhibiting transmission through endogenous opioids and through descending
noradrenaline and serotonin; activated by stress, attention and emotion,
accounting for the variability of pain,
and the system on which the opioid and monoaminergic analgesics act — a descending
control of central importance.
Distinguish nociceptive, inflammatory and neuropathic pain.
It is clinically useful to distinguish the principal types of pain by their
mechanism, because they behave differently and respond to different treatments,
a distinction following from the physiology of nociception and its modulation.
Nociceptive pain is the pain arising from the activation of nociceptors by actual
or threatened tissue damage, transmitted through the normal pain pathway;
it is the pain of acute injury and of noxious stimuli,
and it serves a protective function, warning of and limiting damage.
Inflammatory pain arises when tissue injury and inflammation sensitise the
nociceptors and the pain pathway, so that the area becomes hypersensitive — painful
to normally non-painful stimuli, allodynia, and more painful to noxious stimuli,
hyperalgesia; this promotes the protection and healing of the injured area,
and is the pain of established injury and inflammation.
Neuropathic pain is quite different:
it arises not from the activation of nociceptors but from damage to or dysfunction
of the nervous system itself — the nerves or the central pathways;
it is often described as burning, shooting or electric,
may be associated with abnormal sensations,
and is frequently chronic and difficult to treat,
responding poorly to conventional analgesics and better to drugs such as certain
antidepressants and anticonvulsants.
So nociceptive pain arises from the activation of nociceptors by tissue damage,
serving a protective warning; inflammatory pain from the sensitisation of the
pathway by injury, causing allodynia and hyperalgesia that protect healing;
and neuropathic pain from damage to the nervous system itself, often chronic,
burning and responding to different drugs — a classification by mechanism guiding
treatment.
Describe peripheral and central sensitisation, including wind-up.
Sensitisation — an increase in the responsiveness of the pain system — occurs at
both the peripheral and the central level following injury,
and it is important because it underlies the hypersensitivity of injured tissue and
the development of chronic pain, and is a target of analgesic strategies.
Peripheral sensitisation is the increased sensitivity of the nociceptors themselves
at the site of injury: the inflammatory mediators released by tissue damage — such
as prostaglandins, bradykinin, and others — lower the threshold of the nociceptors
and increase their responsiveness, so that the injured area becomes hypersensitive,
the basis of primary hyperalgesia, and the site of action of the anti-inflammatory
analgesics.
Central sensitisation is an increase in the excitability of the neurons of the
dorsal horn, induced by ongoing nociceptive input:
the second-order neurons become more responsive,
so that pain is amplified and spreads beyond the injured area,
the basis of secondary hyperalgesia and allodynia.
A particular phenomenon is wind-up: with repeated C-fibre stimulation,
the response of the dorsal horn neurons progressively increases,
mediated importantly by the NMDA receptor. These changes contribute to the
transition to chronic pain.
So peripheral sensitisation is the lowering of nociceptor thresholds by
inflammatory mediators, causing primary hyperalgesia;
central sensitisation is the increased excitability of dorsal horn neurons from
ongoing input, causing secondary hyperalgesia and allodynia,
with wind-up — the NMDA-mediated progressive amplification on repeated stimulation;
processes underlying the hypersensitivity of injury and the development of chronic
pain, and targets of analgesia, including pre-emptive and multimodal approaches.
Pull it together: how does an understanding of pain physiology inform its treatment?
I would draw it together by mapping the analgesic approaches onto the stages of the
pain pathway, since the rational, multimodal treatment of pain follows directly
from its physiology.
Pain begins with the activation and sensitisation of the nociceptors in the injured
tissue; here the anti-inflammatory analgesics,
by reducing the prostaglandins that sensitise the nociceptors, and local measures,
act to reduce the peripheral input.
The information is then carried by the primary afferents;
here the local anaesthetics, by blocking conduction,
interrupt the transmission — the basis of regional and local anaesthesia.
The signal passes through the dorsal horn, a site of modulation; here the opioids,
acting on opioid receptors, and the descending inhibition they recruit,
reduce transmission, as do drugs enhancing the descending noradrenaline;
and the gate can be closed by non-painful stimulation.
Central sensitisation and wind-up, mediated by the NMDA receptor,
are reduced by NMDA antagonists such as ketamine,
and the rationale for pre-emptive and multimodal analgesia.
The emotional dimension is addressed by attention to anxiety and the psychological
state.
So the physiology of pain informs its treatment at every level:
anti-inflammatory drugs at the sensitised nociceptor,
local anaesthetics on the afferent,
opioids and descending inhibition at the dorsal horn,
NMDA antagonists against sensitisation,
and attention to the emotional dimension — the basis of the rational,
multimodal analgesia that treats pain along its whole pathway.
Describe the transduction of noxious stimuli at the nociceptor,
including the role of the TRP channels.
The first step in pain is the transduction of a noxious stimulus into an electrical
signal at the nociceptor, and the discovery of the receptors that mediate this,
particularly the transient receptor potential channels,
has illuminated how different noxious stimuli are detected,
so it is worth describing.
The nociceptor must convert a noxious mechanical,
thermal or chemical stimulus into a depolarisation — a generator potential — which,
if sufficient, triggers action potentials.
This transduction is achieved by specialised receptor proteins in the nociceptor
membrane, which open ion channels in response to the stimulus.
Among the most important are the transient receptor potential, or TRP, channels:
these are cation channels that open in response to particular stimuli.
The TRP vanilloid-one receptor, for example, is opened by noxious heat,
and also by capsaicin, the pungent substance in chilli peppers — which is why
capsaicin causes burning pain — and by a low pH;
other TRP channels respond to cold, and to various chemical irritants.
Their opening admits cations, depolarising the nociceptor.
Other receptors detect noxious mechanical stimuli and chemical mediators.
So noxious stimuli are transduced at the nociceptor by specialised receptor
proteins that open ion channels, prominent among them the transient receptor
potential channels — the TRP vanilloid-one receptor detecting noxious heat,
capsaicin and acid, and others detecting cold and irritants — their opening
depolarising the nociceptor to generate the pain signal;
the molecular basis of nociceptive transduction,
and a target of analgesic drugs such as capsaicin and TRP-channel agents.
Describe the chemical mediators that activate and sensitise nociceptors in
inflammation.
When tissue is injured and inflamed,
a mixture of chemical mediators is released that activates and sensitises the
nociceptors, producing the pain and tenderness of inflammation,
and knowing these — sometimes called the inflammatory soup — is important,
since several are targets of analgesics.
Tissue injury and the resulting inflammation release, from the damaged cells,
the blood and the inflammatory cells,
a host of chemical mediators that act on the nociceptors.
These include: hydrogen ions, from the acidic environment of injured tissue;
potassium, released from damaged cells; bradykinin,
a potent activator of nociceptors; histamine and serotonin,
from mast cells and platelets; the prostaglandins,
produced from arachidonic acid by the cyclo-oxygenase enzyme,
which sensitise the nociceptors to other mediators; and cytokines,
and nerve growth factor.
Some of these directly activate the nociceptors, causing pain; others,
particularly the prostaglandins, sensitise them — lowering their threshold and
increasing their responsiveness — producing the primary hyperalgesia of inflamed
tissue.
The nociceptors themselves contribute,
releasing substances such as substance P that promote the inflammation — neurogenic
inflammation.
So injury and inflammation release a mixture of mediators — hydrogen ions,
potassium, bradykinin, histamine, serotonin, prostaglandins,
cytokines and nerve growth factor — which activate and,
especially the prostaglandins, sensitise the nociceptors,
producing the pain and primary hyperalgesia of inflammation;
with the nociceptors contributing to neurogenic inflammation;
the prostaglandin component being the target of the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs.
Describe referred and visceral pain.
Pain from the viscera has distinctive features that differ from the pain of the
body surface, including the phenomenon of referral,
and understanding these follows from the organisation of the nociceptive afferents,
and is clinically important.
Visceral pain — from the internal organs — differs from somatic pain in several
ways: it is typically poorly localised, dull and diffuse,
rather than sharp and precise; it is often felt not at the site of the organ but
referred elsewhere; and it is associated with strong autonomic and emotional
responses, such as nausea and sweating.
The viscera have a relatively sparse nociceptor innervation,
responding particularly to stretch, distension,
ischaemia and inflammation rather than to cutting or burning.
Referred pain is the phenomenon by which visceral pain is felt in a region of the
body surface remote from the organ — classically,
the pain of cardiac ischaemia felt in the chest and left arm.
The explanation is convergence: the visceral afferents and the somatic afferents
from the corresponding skin area converge onto the same second-order neurons in the
dorsal horn; the brain, more accustomed to receiving signals from the skin,
misattributes the visceral pain to the somatic area sharing the pathway.
The pattern of referral follows the embryological segmental origin.
So visceral pain is poorly localised, dull and diffuse, responding to stretch,
ischaemia and inflammation, with strong autonomic responses;
and it is often referred to a remote body-surface area — as cardiac pain to the arm
— because the visceral and somatic afferents converge on the same dorsal horn
neurons, the brain misattributing it to the skin;
features following from the visceral afferent organisation and of diagnostic
importance.
Describe the opioid receptors and the endogenous opioid system.
The body possesses its own opioid system — endogenous opioid peptides acting on
opioid receptors — which modulates pain, and this is of fundamental importance,
both physiologically and because it is the system on which the opioid analgesic
drugs act, so it is worth describing.
There are opioid receptors, of which the principal types are the mu,
the delta and the kappa receptors; they are metabotropic,
G-protein-coupled receptors, found at many sites in the pain pathway and the brain
— in the dorsal horn, the brainstem, the periaqueductal grey, and elsewhere.
Their activation inhibits the transmission of pain: presynaptically,
by reducing the release of transmitter from the nociceptive afferents,
and postsynaptically, by inhibiting the second-order neurons;
and they activate the descending inhibition.
The body produces endogenous ligands for these receptors — the endogenous opioid
peptides, including the endorphins,
the enkephalins and the dynorphins — which are released by neurons of the
pain-modulating system and act as transmitters, producing analgesia;
their release accounts for phenomena such as stress-induced analgesia.
The opioid analgesic drugs, such as morphine, act by binding these same receptors,
chiefly the mu receptor, mimicking the endogenous opioids to produce analgesia —
and also the other opioid effects.
So the endogenous opioid system comprises the mu,
delta and kappa opioid receptors and their endogenous peptide ligands — endorphins,
enkephalins and dynorphins — which inhibit pain transmission pre- and
postsynaptically and activate descending inhibition,
mediating stress-induced analgesia;
the opioid drugs acting on these same receptors, chiefly mu,
to produce analgesia — a system of fundamental physiological and pharmacological
importance.
Describe the periaqueductal grey and stimulation-produced analgesia.
The periaqueductal grey matter is a key structure in the descending control of
pain, and the phenomenon of stimulation-produced analgesia,
by which its stimulation suppresses pain,
was an important demonstration of the brain's intrinsic analgesic system,
so it is worth describing.
The periaqueductal grey is a region of grey matter surrounding the cerebral
aqueduct in the midbrain.
It is a central component of the descending pain-modulating system:
it receives inputs from higher centres,
including those concerned with emotion and stress, and it projects,
via relays in the rostral ventromedial medulla,
down to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord,
where it controls the transmission of nociceptive information.
Stimulation-produced analgesia is the observation that electrical stimulation of
the periaqueductal grey produces a profound analgesia,
sufficient to allow surgery in animals,
without affecting other sensations — demonstrating directly that activating this
region suppresses pain.
The analgesia is mediated by the descending pathways activating the inhibition in
the dorsal horn, partly through the endogenous opioid system,
since it is reduced by opioid antagonists.
This system is the substrate through which the opioids, stress,
and emotional and cognitive factors modulate pain.
So the periaqueductal grey, in the midbrain around the aqueduct,
is a central component of the descending pain-modulating system,
projecting via the medulla to the dorsal horn;
its electrical stimulation produces a profound analgesia — stimulation-produced
analgesia — mediated by descending inhibition and the endogenous opioids,
demonstrating the brain's intrinsic analgesic system and the substrate of opioid
and emotional modulation of pain.
Describe pre-emptive and preventive analgesia.
The understanding of central sensitisation has given rise to the concepts of
pre-emptive and preventive analgesia,
which aim to reduce postoperative pain by acting before or limiting the
sensitisation that surgery induces,
so they are worth describing as an application of pain physiology.
The rationale rests on central sensitisation and wind-up:
the barrage of nociceptive input during surgery sensitises the dorsal horn,
amplifying subsequent pain and contributing to the severity and persistence of
postoperative pain.
Pre-emptive analgesia is the idea of giving analgesia before the painful stimulus —
before the surgical incision — so as to prevent the establishment of central
sensitisation, on the reasoning that preventing the sensitisation is more effective
than treating it once established; the same analgesic given before,
rather than after, the stimulus might thus produce a greater effect.
The clinical evidence for a benefit of timing alone has, however, been inconsistent.
The broader and more robust concept is preventive analgesia:
the aim of reducing the sensitisation and the consequent pain by effective
analgesia extending throughout the perioperative period — before,
during and after surgery — using multimodal techniques,
including agents that act against sensitisation,
such as the NMDA antagonists and local anaesthetics,
with the goal of reducing both acute and persistent postoperative pain.
So pre-emptive analgesia is the giving of analgesia before the surgical stimulus to
prevent central sensitisation, though the evidence for timing alone is
inconsistent; while preventive analgesia, the broader concept,
aims to reduce sensitisation and pain by effective multimodal analgesia throughout
the perioperative period — applications of the physiology of central sensitisation
to the reduction of postoperative pain.
Describe the principle of multimodal analgesia.
Multimodal analgesia is the central strategy of modern pain management,
and its rationale follows directly from the physiology of the pain pathway and the
variety of sites and mechanisms at which pain can be modulated,
so it is worth setting out.
The principle is to combine analgesic drugs and techniques with different
mechanisms and sites of action, rather than relying on a single agent,
in order to achieve better pain relief with fewer side effects.
The rationale is twofold.
First, because pain is processed at many levels — the nociceptor,
the afferent fibre, the dorsal horn,
the descending modulation — attacking it simultaneously at several of these
produces additive or synergistic analgesia, more effective than a single agent.
Second, by using several agents at lower doses rather than a large dose of one,
the dose-related side effects of each — particularly the respiratory depression,
sedation, nausea and other effects of the opioids — are reduced;
this opioid-sparing effect is a major aim.
So a typical multimodal regimen combines, for example,
paracetamol and a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug,
acting peripherally and centrally; a local anaesthetic technique,
blocking conduction; an opioid for the dorsal horn and descending system;
and sometimes adjuncts such as an NMDA antagonist or an alpha-two agonist.
So multimodal analgesia combines agents and techniques with different mechanisms
and sites — anti-inflammatories, local anaesthetics,
opioids and adjuncts — to attack pain at several levels of its pathway
simultaneously, achieving additive analgesia while reducing the dose and side
effects of each, particularly sparing opioids;
the central strategy of modern pain management,
following directly from the physiology of the pain pathway.
Describe the measurement and assessment of pain.
Because pain is a subjective experience,
its measurement presents particular difficulties,
yet its assessment is essential for its management,
so the approaches to measuring it, and their limitations, are worth knowing.
The fundamental difficulty is that pain is subjective — a personal experience that
cannot be directly measured by an observer — so its assessment relies chiefly on
the patient's own report.
The simplest and most used tools are self-report scales of pain intensity:
the verbal rating scale, in which the patient describes the pain in words;
the numerical rating scale, in which they rate it from zero to ten;
and the visual analogue scale, in which they mark a point on a line.
These are simple and useful for tracking pain and its response to treatment in an
individual. More detailed instruments assess the multiple dimensions of pain — its
quality, its emotional impact — such as the McGill pain questionnaire.
Particular situations require special approaches:
for those who cannot self-report — young children, the cognitively impaired,
the sedated or ventilated patient — observational and behavioural scales are used,
based on signs such as facial expression, movement, and physiological changes.
So pain, being subjective, is assessed chiefly by the patient's self-report,
using intensity scales — verbal, numerical and visual analogue — for tracking pain
and its response, and multidimensional questionnaires for its fuller assessment;
with behavioural and observational scales for those unable to self-report,
such as children and the sedated; the measurement of pain being essential to its
management despite the difficulty of its subjective nature.
Describe the transition from acute to chronic pain.
Most acute pain resolves as the injury heals,
but in some cases pain persists and becomes chronic,
and understanding the transition from acute to chronic pain is important,
since it has implications for prevention,
and chronic pain is a major clinical problem.
Acute pain is the normal, protective pain associated with injury,
which resolves as the tissue heals.
Chronic pain, conventionally defined as pain persisting beyond the normal time of
healing — often taken as three months — has lost its protective purpose and becomes
a disease in its own right.
The transition is thought to involve the persistence and entrenchment of the
changes that begin in acute pain. Central sensitisation, initially adaptive,
may persist and become maladaptive,
so that the pain system remains amplified after the injury has healed.
Changes occur in the dorsal horn and the brain — in the genes expressed,
the connections, and the descending modulation,
which may shift from inhibition towards facilitation.
Damage to nerves may produce neuropathic pain.
Psychological and social factors strongly influence the transition.
The severity and duration of the acute pain, and the degree of nerve injury,
are risk factors, which is part of the rationale for preventive analgesia.
So the transition from acute to chronic pain — pain persisting beyond healing,
losing its protective purpose — involves the persistence and entrenchment of
central sensitisation and of changes in the dorsal horn,
brain and descending modulation, sometimes with neuropathic mechanisms,
strongly influenced by psychological factors;
the severity of the acute pain being a risk factor,
and the rationale for trying to prevent it — an important process underlying the
major problem of chronic pain.
Describe phantom limb pain.
Phantom limb pain is a striking and instructive pain phenomenon,
in which pain is felt in a limb that is no longer present,
and it illuminates the central representation of the body and of pain,
so it is worth describing.
After the amputation of a limb, many patients continue to experience sensations
that seem to come from the missing limb — the phantom limb — and a substantial
proportion experience pain in it, the phantom limb pain,
which may be severe and persistent.
The phenomenon shows that the experience of the limb, and of pain in it,
does not require the limb itself, but resides in the central representation — the
brain's map of the body.
Its mechanisms are thought to involve changes at several levels:
the cut nerves in the stump may form neuromas that generate abnormal impulses;
the dorsal horn and the central pathways undergo the changes of sensitisation and
reorganisation; and, importantly, the cortical map of the body reorganises after
the loss of its input — the cortical area formerly representing the lost limb being
invaded by adjacent areas — and this maladaptive plasticity is associated with the
pain.
Psychological factors contribute. The condition is often difficult to treat.
So phantom limb pain is pain felt in an amputated, absent limb,
showing that the experience of the limb resides in its central representation;
its mechanisms including abnormal activity from stump neuromas,
central sensitisation, and maladaptive reorganisation of the cortical body map — an
instructive phenomenon illuminating the central representation of the body and of
pain, and a difficult clinical problem.
Describe placebo analgesia.
The placebo response in pain — placebo analgesia — is a real and instructive
phenomenon, demonstrating the power of the descending modulation and of
psychological factors over pain, so it is worth describing as more than a mere
artefact.
A placebo is an inert treatment, without intrinsic pharmacological action;
the placebo response is a genuine clinical effect produced by the administration of
such a treatment, arising from the patient's expectation and the context.
Placebo analgesia is the reduction of pain by a placebo,
and it has been shown to be a real, measurable phenomenon,
not merely a reporting bias.
Its importance is that it has a physiological basis: it is mediated,
at least in part, by the brain's endogenous pain-modulating systems.
The expectation of relief activates the descending inhibitory pathways and the
release of endogenous opioids — demonstrated by the finding that placebo analgesia
can be reduced or blocked by the opioid antagonist naloxone,
showing that it works through the endogenous opioid system.
Other mechanisms contribute. The placebo response illustrates how powerfully
expectation, emotion and context — acting through the descending modulation —
influence the experience of pain, and it is a component of the response to any
analgesic.
So placebo analgesia is the genuine reduction of pain by an inert treatment,
arising from expectation and context;
it is mediated physiologically by the descending pain-modulating system and the
endogenous opioids — being partly reversible by naloxone — demonstrating the power
of expectation and emotion over pain through the descending modulation,
and forming a component of the response to all analgesia.
Describe the cortical processing of pain — the pain matrix.
Pain is not appreciated at a single site in the brain but is processed by a
distributed network of cortical and subcortical regions,
sometimes called the pain matrix, and understanding this reflects the
multidimensional nature of pain, so it is worth describing.
The pain pathway, ascending through the thalamus,
projects not to one cortical area but to several,
which together construct the experience of pain in its different dimensions.
The sensory-discriminative dimension — the location,
intensity and quality of the pain — is processed chiefly in the somatosensory
cortices, which receive the somatotopically-organised input and identify where the
pain is and how strong.
The affective-motivational dimension — the unpleasantness and emotional impact of
the pain, which drives the desire to escape it — is processed in regions including
the anterior cingulate cortex and the insula,
which are connected with the limbic system.
The cognitive-evaluative dimension — the appraisal of the pain in context —
involves the prefrontal regions. These regions, acting together as a network,
construct the unified, multidimensional experience of pain,
and they also engage the descending modulation.
The same network is active in chronic pain, often with altered processing.
So pain is processed by a distributed network — the pain matrix — the somatosensory
cortices handling the sensory-discriminative dimension of location and intensity,
the anterior cingulate and insula the affective-motivational dimension of
unpleasantness, and the prefrontal regions the cognitive appraisal;
together constructing the unified, multidimensional experience of pain and engaging
the descending modulation — reflecting that pain is both a sensation and an emotion.
Describe the cyclo-oxygenase pathway and the mechanism of the non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs.
The cyclo-oxygenase pathway, producing the prostaglandins,
is central to inflammatory pain, and the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs act
by inhibiting it, so understanding this pathway explains both their analgesic
action and their side effects, making it worth describing.
When tissue is injured, the enzyme phospholipase liberates arachidonic acid from
the cell membranes; the cyclo-oxygenase enzyme then converts arachidonic acid to
the prostaglandins and related substances.
The prostaglandins produced at the site of injury sensitise the nociceptors,
contributing to the pain and hyperalgesia of inflammation,
and they also mediate other features of inflammation,
such as the vasodilatation and fever.
The non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs act by inhibiting the cyclo-oxygenase
enzyme, so reducing the production of the prostaglandins;
this reduces the sensitisation of the nociceptors and so the inflammatory pain,
and reduces the inflammation and fever — their analgesic,
anti-inflammatory and antipyretic actions.
However, the cyclo-oxygenase enzyme exists in two main forms: one, COX-one,
produces prostaglandins with protective physiological roles — in the gastric
mucosa, the kidney and the platelets — while the other, COX-two,
is induced at sites of inflammation.
The non-selective drugs inhibit both,
so their inhibition of the protective prostaglandins causes the characteristic side
effects — gastric, renal and bleeding;
the selective COX-two inhibitors were developed to spare these.
So the cyclo-oxygenase pathway converts arachidonic acid to prostaglandins,
which sensitise nociceptors and mediate inflammation;
the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs inhibit cyclo-oxygenase,
reducing the prostaglandins to give analgesia,
anti-inflammatory and antipyretic effects; but,
by also inhibiting the protective COX-one prostaglandins of the stomach,
kidney and platelets, they cause gastric,
renal and bleeding side effects — a pathway explaining both their action and their
adverse effects.
Describe the proposed mechanism of action of paracetamol.
Paracetamol, also known as acetaminophen,
is one of the most widely used analgesics, yet its mechanism of action is,
perhaps surprisingly, not fully established,
and an outline of the current understanding is worth giving,
since it differs from the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
Paracetamol is an effective analgesic and antipyretic, but,
unlike the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,
it has little anti-inflammatory action and does not share their gastric,
renal and platelet side effects — indicating a different mechanism.
Its precise mechanism remains uncertain, but several actions are proposed.
It appears to act chiefly within the central nervous system.
It is thought to inhibit prostaglandin production centrally — perhaps a central
effect on the cyclo-oxygenase system,
possibly a variant or in particular conditions — which would explain its central
analgesic and antipyretic actions without the peripheral anti-inflammatory effect.
It is also proposed to act through the descending serotonergic pain-modulating
pathways, and through a metabolite that interacts with the endocannabinoid system
and the TRP vanilloid receptors. The full picture is still debated.
Its safety in normal doses, but its liver toxicity in overdose — through a toxic
metabolite — are well established.
So paracetamol is an effective central analgesic and antipyretic with little
anti-inflammatory action and without the typical non-steroidal side effects;
its mechanism, though not fully established,
is thought to involve a central inhibition of prostaglandin production and actions
on the descending serotonergic and the endocannabinoid and TRP systems — a distinct
and still-debated mechanism, with well-known hepatotoxicity in overdose.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Pain is an unpleasant sensory AND emotional experience associated with
actual or potential tissue damage — more than the detection of injury.
Nociception (its first step) is the detection of noxious stimuli by nociceptors:
high-threshold free nerve endings responding to mechanical,
thermal and chemical stimuli (often polymodal), sensitised by injury.
Second, Nociceptive afferents: A-delta fibres (thinly myelinated, faster) → fast,
sharp, localised first pain; C fibres (unmyelinated, slow, polymodal) → slow, dull,
poorly-localised second pain.
Cell bodies in dorsal root ganglia; they enter the dorsal horn,
synapsing via glutamate and substance P onto second-order neurons that cross and
ascend in the spinothalamic tract to thalamus → cortex (sensory-discriminative) and
limbic system (emotional).
Third, Gate control theory (Melzack & Wall):
dorsal horn transmission is gated — large touch fibres close the gate (rubbing,
TENS relieve pain), small nociceptive fibres open it,
and descending influences modulate it.
Descending modulation from the periaqueductal grey and rostral ventromedial medulla
inhibits the dorsal horn via endogenous opioids and descending
noradrenaline/serotonin — the system on which opioid and monoaminergic analgesics
act.
Fourth, Types: nociceptive (nociceptor activation by tissue damage — protective);
inflammatory (sensitisation by injury → allodynia/hyperalgesia,
protecting healing); neuropathic (damage to the nervous system itself —
burning/shooting, often chronic, responds to antidepressants/anticonvulsants not
Fifth, Peripheral sensitisation: inflammatory mediators (prostaglandins,
bradykinin) lower nociceptor thresholds → primary hyperalgesia (target of
anti-inflammatory analgesics).
Central sensitisation: increased dorsal-horn excitability from ongoing input →
secondary hyperalgesia/allodynia, with wind-up (NMDA-mediated progressive
amplification).
Multimodal analgesia maps onto the pathway: anti-inflammatories at the nociceptor,
local anaesthetics on the afferent, opioids at the dorsal horn,
NMDA antagonists (ketamine) against sensitisation.
Thank you. That concludes the station.